Okay, we're talking to Scott Berg.
Just forget that it's there.
Okay.
And congratulations.
Thank you very much.
You know, a book I wrote called The Gentle Madness that deals to a great extent with the special collections of university libraries, and clearly this is a book that's not possible without the special collections holdings at Yale.
My book, yeah.
Your book.
That was the reason to do it.
Because we have had writings about Lindbergh, we certainly have had writings by Lindbergh.
Right.
What is in these, what is it, 2000?
Yeah, although they weren't all at Yale.
There were about 500 plus of papers of Charles Lindbergh at Yale.
Almost as much, again, of Anne Lindbergh at Yale.
Several, about 100, I'd say, of photographs and other pictorial items.
Then there were Morrow papers at, that is, Dwight Morrow's papers at Amherst, Anne's mother's papers, and sister's papers at Smith.
Then there were papers at the Missouri Historical Society related to the flight, the childhood papers, and the grandfather and father's papers are in Minnesota.
So they were all told about 2,000, a little more than 2,000 boxes, I think.
And you went through pretty much everything?
I went through everything.
The only thing I didn't go through was, like, the complete papers of Dwight W. Morrow.
You know, I went through the papers that applied.
And we're talking about an ambassador here who must have an extraordinary archive of papers.
Well, exactly.
98% totally irrelevant to everything.
Yeah, I mean, certainly to my work.
But his personal papers, I certainly went through all of those.
But the bulk of it, that core thousand boxes of...
Oh, and then there was a crate at Princeton that had been sealed since the 30s, actually.
Really?
The Lindberghs had given it to Princeton and just sort of forgotten about it.
And what was it?
And it turned out to be some interesting papers from that period, just a bunch of papers that just escaped somehow, but they crated up one day when they closed their house.
Now, when you enter—this is your third big biography—and when you go into something like this,
Do you expect that it's going to take a decade?
This I did, actually.
And in fact, when I met Mrs. Lindbergh to press my case, I remember one of my selling points was, oh, Mrs. Lindbergh, unlike so many biographers who come to you and want to do a book in a year or two, I will give this seven to ten years if it takes that.
And I remember she leaned over
And she said, oh, do you think you could do it in just 10 years?
And I said, oh, I'll try.
If it takes more, if it takes 20, I'll take 20.
What do you think she wanted out of this?
I think she wanted a fair and honest biography.
I honestly do mean that.
Given what we know about their relationship, it's certainly...
There were appearances and there's reality.
And I have to believe she understood that you would be getting there.
I know she did.
And at the same time, I think, I honestly felt when she let me do it, and I think this was the really good timing on my part, I think she felt she would not be alive to read the book.
She was 82 when I met her.
She is alive.
She's 92 now.
I don't think she can read the book.
She's straying mentally.
But I think that was a factor.
I think that was a factor.
And we also have Reeves' book coming out simultaneously.
Is this a coincidental thing, do you think?
Because I noticed they're being reviewed together in a number of places, which is either fortunate or unfortunate, depending on how you look at it.
Yeah.
I think, I believe, that was her publisher's.
Makes sense.
The book was not meant to come out until next spring, her book.
And suddenly there it was.
And there they are being... Yes, and I noticed in their... Somebody sent me a copy, or Reed sent me a copy of The Galleys, and I noticed in their galleys they said, timed to be published with Scott Reed.
That makes sense.
Yeah, although I felt they shortchanged her in a bit, in that I think her book stands on its own.
And they're quite different books.
It does, and actually they certainly can be read alongside each other.
Yeah.
But yours is really...
a scholarly, detailed... Yeah, mine's the whole story.
Hers is a memoir.
And the work of a professional biographer, and this is the account of a child.
Yeah, exactly, more or less.
I just thought they shortchanged her in that I thought if my book came out and did well, it would just create more interest in Lindbergh.
And if hers came out next spring, well... But it is interesting that hers, and I haven't had a chance to look at her, I haven't.
In my piece, I'll probably give it a line.
I mean, I doubt if I'll give it more than that.
I mean, all you read is that piece of consumer information.
Absolutely.
And she's a very good writer.
Yeah.
She is.
She's a wonderful... Actually, they're a very bright and capable family.
And literary.
And, you know, going back to Charles Lindbergh, he's a wonderful... As you point out, he's a wonderful writer.
He really is.
The Spirit of St.
Louis deserves the Pulitzer Prize.
It is a thrilling book.
And, you know, the rap against that people were saying...
sneering that he couldn't have written it.
Maybe his wife wrote it.
Yes, exactly.
And if you read anything that Anne Morrow Limburg wrote, the tense structure and everything that he used was decidedly his.
Totally his.
Absolutely.
So you don't necessarily agree with the woman who said if it weren't for the flight, he'd be a gas jockey.
Indeed not.
And she did come around, that woman, I should say.
And in fact, I think I have enough footnote in the back that she came around.
No, I don't agree at all.
Because I think he had a constantly curious mind.
He really had vast interests.
And when you look at the work with Goddard and archaeology and anthropology and the medical stuff with Dr. Carell, this was a very restless thinker.
You know, because we certainly do perceive of him as an American hero, and there certainly are heroic qualities.
And to look at it in the classical sense,
Like all tragic heroes, or classical heroes, there has to be a fatal flaw.
And I'm wondering if you feel that he has one, and if so, what is his flaw?
What is his character flaw?
Yeah, it might be a form of hubris, in fact.
I mean, it's that stubbornness.
As one of the daughters says, there were two ways of doing things, father's way and the wrong way.
And I think that.
retracting anything, never recanting, never taking anything back.
And there's something admirable about somebody, I think, who stands by his record, which he always did.
He always took full responsibility.
On the other hand, I mean, the German stuff, for example, and in later years recanted and said we were naive or wrong or we didn't know.
Charles never did.
You're Jewish.
Coming into this,
What did you hope to find, a vindication or a smoking gun?
Well, you know, honestly, I hoped to find, I really did hope to find the truth.
I really, because it had been, I had grown up with all the prejudice, all the Jewish prejudices against Lindbergh, which were that Lindbergh was prejudiced against Jews.
So I just wanted to see, was he really that terrible?
And if so, how did he get that way?
And if he wasn't, well, let's put that out there, too.
So I found a little more and a little less.
I mean, I found that he was less anti-Semitic than I had been raised.
He wasn't a Jew hater.
He wasn't a Jew baiter, really.
On the other hand, there in black and white were these sentiments about Jews that did get cut from the published diaries.
And that was pretty shocking.
I'm kind of surprised at Bill Jovanovich.
I was, too, to be perfectly honest with you.
I know people that have worked with him, and I would have thought that he would have been a little bit more professional.
Professional integrity?
I won't use that in my piece, but I think I expected more.
This is sugarcoating history.
Yeah, I think they figured, well, let's not open the whole can of worms again.
But on the other hand, then why write that introduction saying we changed nothing?
Exactly.
And then the paperwork is there for Scott Berg to come along and find it.
I know.
Yeah, at least destroy the pages.
Yeah, I mean, at some point we're going to see this stuff.
Absolutely.
And in this case, sooner rather than later.
Now, that was a surprise to me.
Yeah.
But to get back to your earlier question, it was rather shocking to me when I would come across these things.
Did you feel, I know Michiko loved your book, and I don't quote other reviews, but she kind of wishes that you had drawn a few more conclusions.
How do you respond to that?
Well, to that charge, what she was basically finding fault with, that to me was something I
I pride myself on in the book, that I basically, and that I had no psychological interpretation.
I hate psycho biology.
Well, I eschew that.
So do I. It makes me crazy.
And my point is, I'll serve up all the material for you, and if you want to do this psychoanalysis, go ahead.
And here's the box number of Yale if you want to go look at the stuff.
Yeah, if you want even more.
Yeah, but I'll present you all the facts you need.
So there it is.
But I am not going to be the one...
Because, well, I don't know.
You're not qualified.
Not qualified.
I did an interview with a woman.
Who said that's the answer anyway?
A psychotherapist, a psychoanalyst, a psychiatrist in Belgium, who just wrote a delightful biography of Casanova.
You know, if anyone has ever... Yeah, really.
Right.
But she didn't, you know, and she said, you know, he didn't ask me to be his... Yeah, that's right.
He didn't invite me to be his shrink, and I don't have all the facts.
And, you know, so I don't feel that I have the...
right to do.
And this is a trained clinical psychoanalyst.
And I was going to say, in a Freudian might disagree with a Jungian interpretation or an Adlerian.
Who wants that?
Anyway, you're a biographer.
Absolutely.
You're telling me about the life.
And, you know, it is, who is it that said this to me?
David McCullough.
Yeah.
You know, he said, when you're writing about a person, when you decide, choosing the subject is the hardest thing for a biographer, number one.
Correct.
When he was talking about why he might do
and he ultimately didn't, was a U.S.
grant or Teddy Roosevelt when he was talking about the Panama Canal.
He said, the amazing thing is when you read their own memoirs, when you read what they write about themselves, it's more important to see what they don't say about themselves than what they do say about themselves.
And here we have Lindbergh, Pulitzer Prize winning writer, half a dozen books.
Yeah, all autobiographical.
All autobiographical.
What is it that Lindbergh didn't say about himself that...
I love this question, and I love David McCullough for saying that too, because that's the thing.
That's it, yeah.
Because the childhood, what little he writes about his childhood, and this is the answer, the childhood, what little he writes is sort of Huck Finn.
And there we were rafting on the upper Mississippi and blah, blah, blah.
And in fact, it was a terrible, really unhappy childhood, most of which was spent away from the upper Mississippi.
And there is that telling line where he says, I really don't remember my childhood.
Well, that in and of itself... That's the most amazing statement when you come right down on it.
I couldn't believe he actually wrote it and didn't realize what that meant.
And I didn't realize that his mother came and camped in with him, a la Douglas MacArthur.
There are a number of really very important people in history whose mothers came to live with them.
Absolutely.
Well, I love Charles Lindbergh going off to college, and there's a mother.
That's what I mean.
Well, didn't Doug MacArthur's mother move to West Point?
Yeah.
Oh, yeah, right.
And there are another really, a couple of other really extraordinary examples where a mother went along.
And there's a mother who used to shake hands goodnight with him.
Yeah, really.
I mean, that was strange.
So it's this odd thing.
You know, I have a pilot's license, but I haven't flown in years, but I have a great passion for aviation.
And, you know, to me, Charles Lindbergh crossing the Atlantic
and coming within a half a degree of his kind of dead reckoning landfall.
Yes, exactly.
It's insane.
You can say anything you want.
Mark McGuire can hit 70, but he ain't gave proof.
That's right.
And whatever people say about Lindbergh, that is still... It's still fundamentally there.
...an extraordinary achievement that can only happen once.
And what I'd also say to that as well is it was a death-defying deed, too.
Right.
Forget the technical aspects.
The man did put his life on the line.
He also very soberly looked at the hazards.
He weighed the hazards against, the risks against.
I think, what did he say?
One or two seasons flying the mail at night.
Yes, exactly.
It can't be anymore.
It can't be worse than this.
Yeah, exactly.
And with what you were saying, too, he resented...
the nickname Lucky Lindy.
That's right.
Because this whole thing was, luck was the least elementary.
There was always some luck, but... Sometimes I'm looking at all these, when I'm having these conversations, I never like to leave, and I'm not done by any means, but you never like to leave until you have the lead, and also the kicker.
I've got the lead now, I think.
You know, the name he found abhorrent was Lucky, Lucky Lindy.
I mean, he left as little to chance as was humanly possible.
You know, if he were meeting at Earhart, that trip would have been on the button.
He'd have made every landfall that he was supposed to.
He was a great navigator.
Yeah.
He was in control of his machine and his human machine.
That's right.
Yeah.
Amazing.
So how do you emerge from this project?
I mean, you must certainly have your own
My feelings about him?
About him, yeah.
They're mixed, but on the whole, they're admirable.
I mean, they're admiring that.
Really?
Yeah, because, well, partly for what you said, first of all, at the basis of this life is that incredible deed.
But it wouldn't be all that.
Beyond that, the human aspect, I think.
I mean, I've taken life lessons from him now, which is...
how you live your life and what you do with it and how much you pack into it.
And it's an approach.
It's an energy level.
It's about purpose.
And that's what I admire about him.
Even when he was wrong, and he was wrong and sometimes stupid and sometimes offensive.
But all that being said, he made something of his life.
And it wasn't for personal gain.
It wasn't for power.
It wasn't for money.
It was to leave the world a better place, I think.
You know, it's also very interesting is that you do get into the Hauptmann matter to a considerable extent.
And you also come out and say that for all the circus atmosphere and the horrible ways in which this thing was handled, they still probably got the right guy.
I think that.
Yeah, I think after all is said and done, actually my feeling about the
the kidnapping and trial after all said and done are two things.
One is what we tend to lose sight of is that a baby died here.
You know, we get all caught up in the conspiracies and maybe the maid did it and blah blah blah.
But you know what?
A baby died.
And the parents of that baby were 25 years old and 30 years old.
That's just hard.
That's the first thing.
The second thing, and I was writing those chapters during the O.J.
trial.
Really?
Yeah, it was so ironic, is there was a mountain of evidence against this guy.
I do believe he got an unfair trial.
I do believe there was sloppy police work, that witnesses lied, media hysteria, all that, and yet there's still a mountain of indisputable evidence against this man.
Well, that's reassuring.
Yeah, I felt that too.
It's not an enduring mystery as to— Not to me.
Well, I mean, especially the money and the ladder.
The money, the ladder, and the handwriting to me.
And the handwriting, yeah.
It's just so indisputable.
It's the DNA of its time, isn't it?
Yeah, well, it was.
It truly was.
And that wood expert, when he got up there, he was dazzling.
So you must—did you find, in a project like this—I guess you did have the luxury of time, didn't you?
You're young.
Yeah.
Oh, I definitely had a luxury of time on this.
And so you could indulge yourself in taking an extended excursion off to the left or to the right.
Absolutely.
And really get into that.
And I did.
And you're saying, geez, maybe I'm spending too much time on this trial.
I've got to get back on track.
No, I never had that.
And in fact, just this whole project, I remember thinking it was the right moment in my life.
Because I thought if I were a little younger, I'm not sure...
I would have had the maturity, the emotional gravity.
And if I were a little older, I'm not sure I would have had the energy to go to all the places I went.
Really?
Yeah, you know, to visit Sweden, and visit Hawaii, and visit France, and just to get to move to New Haven for two years.
You feel, as I do, that as good as material is, documents, and they're essential, you still have to go out and see the place.
You do, you really do.
And smell the air.
I couldn't agree more with you.
You know, the day I went to this little island off the coast of Hilton, Iliad, and I mean, it's the size of this roof, with one house on it.
And boy, standing there, and the wind was whipping up, and the clouds were going, and I thought, I get Charles Lindbergh.
Of course he came here.
Of course.
And how old were you when you started this project?
How old do you start with, how old do I now?
Well, I'm 48, so I started in, I technically started in March of 90.
No, that's fine.
I was just 40.
I can't figure that out.
I was 40 when I started.
This could not have been a first biography for you.
Do you think you had to go with Perkins to go to Lindbergh?
No doubt.
Oh, no doubt.
At least somebody before this.
I couldn't have broken in on this.
So what did you learn from those prior projects that were brought to bear?
Well, I think two things.
First, I learned research skills, which really I needed to tackle this.
I mean, I had more material.
I had as much material for the America First chapter and one other chapter on Lindbergh, as much for that as I did on all of Max Bergman.
Wow.
I mean, in notes and all that.
So just to have the ability to find it and all that.
And I think the second thing beyond the research is I think my writing skills have honed.
Yeah, I think they've definitely improved.
And again, what Lindenberg brought to the project, because he was so precise, I really felt him looking over my shoulder all the time.
And I can't tell you how many sentences I would write, and then I'd hear a voice saying, that's not exactly right.
You know, go back and, no, that word is just wrong.
I'm not really an isolationist.
I'm an anti-interventionist.
You weren't dancing with words either, you know, I think.
I mean, these weren't euphemisms at his part.
They were his take on...
Very precise.
Absolutely.
He did have clarity.
There was no question about that.
He was often wrong, but he was always clear.
It's amazing.
And I don't know, I was talking to David McCullough again recently.
Lucky you.
Excuse me.
I don't know if you get allergies out in California.
Yeah.
I hear the mold is bad today.
It's terrible.
I took my pills and all that.
Anyway.
He enjoyed my book, and he said to me, now you've got to do a biography.
He said, next project, I said, well, after the next one.
But biography, look at how he went, Path Between the Seas, The Brooklyn Bridge, terrific books.
But then he felt now's the time to do a life.
That is, I think, for nonfiction writers, the challenge, isn't it?
I think it is, because you're doing...
You're doing it from the outside and the inside, in a way.
I mean, you're doing the big story, the panorama shot, but then you're doing the close-ups.
And you have to make this a real person.
You're trying to put together a structure, put flesh on the bones of a consequential human being.
Not just a human being, but one of great consequences.
And that's what takes all the time.
It's not just reading through the documents.
I guess the question is, does the individual become a person to you?
At some point, do we go beyond the documents, the material?
Yes.
Well, the quintessence, the fifth essence does take over.
Yeah, I think so.
At what point does that happen?
Does that happen in the research?
You're talking about this critical mass of material that you had for the first chapter and a half.
Do you say at some point, I'm ready now?
Yes.
There are, well, along the way, at least as I do, I'll talk about me in general, but as I go along, there are epiphanies, there's no doubt about it.
And you do hit moments either in papers or, again, walking around Iliac.
Places I got a lot, I had several of them.
When I saw his childhood house, when I saw the grave,
But this is apart from the research, so this is that physical moment.
Talk to me about the epiphanies.
I love epiphanies.
They're a wonderful moment.
Well, do you want the travelogue epiphanies?
Yeah, actually, I like a couple of each.
I remember, well, certainly the six or seven great sights I saw.
When I saw the childhood house in Little Falls, Minnesota,
and went upstairs to the little attic where he used to collect his tin soldiers and things like that.
And I didn't see the house until after I had been through the papers and seen his list of his collections, his cigar band collection, his tin soldier collections.
And when I finally saw this little
attic where he did all this.
That was a jolt.
When I saw Iliak and felt the wind and all that, that was a jolt, because it was like Wuthering Heights in the middle of the water.
And again, I'll give you a third that'll... I like those two.
But also, all the places I visited, and well, I must say, in the Kidnap House, too, walking through the Kidnap House in New Jersey.
I had that feeling, too, because it was also a very windy day when I went, as it had been a windy night when the kidnapping occurred.
But what all the sites had in common also was isolation.
They were all down country roads that are hard to find, and then down mile-long driveways.
I mean, they're really isolated places.
You really do get something from the site, don't you?
I just wrote a chapter in my new book on Monte Cassino, and I really went there.
last year just to visit the cell where Benedict did this rule, you know, which preserved the class.
That's correct.
Why do you have to go there?
You can get pictures of it.
Yeah, you can.
I'm writing this scene, and of course now I'm writing about the destruction of the Abbey and how the manuscript, having been there, having felt that, looking out of that, 1,700 feet above the valley, and you feel that wind.
Yeah.
It's all part of it.
In fact, I'll give you another moment, which is I knew, as I was going through the papers and just starting to put it together in my head, the flight chapter, because Lindbergh had written about it so well, I knew I was somehow going to have to make that special, or at least write it very well.
But it occurred to me that what the chapter was really about was sleep, that here was a man who wanted to go to sleep.
He was desperate for sleep.
Yes.
And I knew the chapter was going to start with that because he had been up for 23 hours.
All he wants to do is go to sleep so he can get a nap in before he does the great flight.
And he doesn't get the nap.
So I knew I wanted that chapter to end not with his landing in Paris, but with his finally getting to go to sleep.
So that's why I decided I will go to Paris and I want to see the bed that he spent the night in.
And that was a great moment for me too, to see the bed.
That's great.
I love this.
Yeah, and the woman who took me through the ambassador's residence, Pamela Harriman, let me in.
She was the ambassador, but then somebody who worked there let me in.
And at one point I asked her to go get me a photograph of something, and then I lay down on the bed, just to get a sense of the bed, which was so narrow and so small.
I mean, Lindbergh was taller than I am, and I felt cramped in this little bed.
So important.
I did a piece on Maurice Sendak last year of Civilization.
magazine.
It'll be in my new book.
Oh great.
But he did execics.
He's totally taken by Melville.
And so he went out to Melville's west out here.
Errol, Errol, Errol, Errol Henry, or whatever he is.
Yeah.
And the same thing.
They let him in to the study and stuff.
And then they closed the doors and he jumped in the back.
How could you not?
You know, you're getting looked out at the desk at the ring lock and this is
There's something that you're getting here.
Total.
It certainly isn't going to translate into the same creative impulse, but you're going to feel something.
Definitely.
It's the kind of thing I do.
Yeah, yeah.
In a small way, but I love it.
So what's next then?
You're doing a movie, right?
Well, I'm not.
I'm Stephen Spielberg.
It must be very interesting to him.
I think it is, and it's going to be a challenge for him in a lot of ways.
I think so, yeah.
But I think he's up to the challenge.
Do you have a take on how he's going to characterize it?
Not exactly, but we've had a couple of conversations, and he's meant to hire the screenwriter this week, actually.
I know they've been negotiating.
That's a job all into itself.
You have to admire these people who can take 10 years' worth of work.
scholarly research and get a 120-page treatment, however they describe it.
It's a different work.
Once it leaves your hands... That's the way I felt, too.
That's exactly the way I felt.
And I think the writers who come to that conclusion early on serve themselves better.
I couldn't agree with them more.
You can meddle with a thing and make demands, blah, blah, blah.
Forget about it.
Have faith in the person who's going to do it.
And I did have faith in him.
I adored Private Ryan and Schindler also.
And you know, Armstead isn't a half-bad movie either, which I just saw this summer with my kids.
But he'll do a very interesting job.
I think he will.
And I think the whole, well, the Jewishness.
How he's going to deal with the alleged anti-Semitism is going to be interesting.
And we've had, actually,
some good conversations about that, because that's obviously troubling.
Yeah.
So let me ask this.
Hedlundberg, he died in 74.
Right.
You're a kid.
Yeah.
But had he lived for another 10 or 15 years, and you still had been given access to these papers, what would be the first question you'd ask, Charles?
Oh, man.
Assuming that he's going to get pissed off and cut you off after two, after 10, 15 minutes.
Yeah.
And is there any kind of different ways to do interviews?
Not the first question, but I guess what would be the, what is the enigma for you that, or is there an enigma for you that continues?
Is there still something impenetrable there?
Yeah, well, I'm not sure about that, but I think I would ask him, after all this time, does he realize
what he was saying and doing, for example, in the Des Moines speech.
And which isn't to say the wrongness of your ways about whether we should have been in the war or this and that, but he was a man who really didn't understand people and never understood politics in a big way.
I just wonder if he came around as anded to understand why what he said was wrong.
He certainly never recanted anything.
Never, never.
And, I mean, do you think there was a naivete combined with a stubbornness?
Yes, I think that's the equation right there, naivete plus stubbornness.
And that equals hubris, I think.
I think so.
Plus, you know, he was twenty-five years old when he became... Well, when he became God.
When he became God.
And when anything he uttered was suddenly like the Delphi oracle, and important and correct, and it was gospel.
That's the point, it was gospel.
He really pissed FDR off in a big way, didn't he?
Yeah, well, earlier with the airmail.
I mean, they disliked each other going in.
Of course, you have one guy who thinks he's the American icon.
These people don't like competition either.
Well, exactly.
And here Lindbergh doesn't even have to run for office.
That's right.
And if he had, it would be like Eisenhower running for office.
Yeah.
Or Reagan, you know.
Yeah, at least.
We love our heroes.
Absolutely, absolutely.
Although the flip side is, once you're elected, you suddenly become accountable.
That's right.
And Lindbergh was never accountable to anybody.
He played it that way.
He was a very bright guy.
His entire life, he had to answer to nobody.
The marriage, of course, you deal with.
I guess going back to the beginning, I guess Mrs. Lindbergh anticipated that you would discover things about their... I guess so.
I mean, she was happy to see him go away.
His absences became welcome.
Well, exactly, which was really something.
But I'll tell you, when I was going through her personal stuff, sometimes I really did wonder why she would allow me to see this.
Vindication, maybe, for herself?
Maybe.
I think so.
something, because she gave, you know, and she was quite a capable woman in her own right, but everything was for him.
I don't know.
Yeah, and I, no, I think you're correct on this, and I think she, and to continue that line, because I think she suffered a great deal, and I think she wanted that put out there somehow.
And she didn't know how to tell, she didn't know how to put that out there, too.
That's the point.
She did not know how to ask for what she wanted.
You know, there are two biographies I'd love to, one is forthcoming when it's done, but Stacey, what's her name?
Stacey Schiff?
Yeah.
She's doing a biography of Joyce's wife, which would be very, very interesting.
Really?
I thought there was a couple, it was a great one, by Brenda Maddox.
Nora.
Is it Joyce's wife?
Ooh.
That's right.
That's a great one.
Maybe it's Lawrence's wife.
I thought it was Joyce's wife.
No, no, no.
Never mind.
Cut, cut, cut.
Nabokov's wife.
Oh, that would be interesting.
The Brenda Maddox book I've got in my head is a wonderful book.
No, but Nabokov's wife, which is a very capable, talented woman.
And then you think also of
of Tolstoy's wife who put up a lot of crap.
I mean, he was running away from her at the train station.
Yeah, really.
And, you know, you look at her diaries.
I'm wondering if, you know, if this is the handmaiden kind of a situation here.
I think so.
I think there's a lot of that.
A very capable, intelligent woman who's really totally giving up the whole wife for the greater glory of the husband.
I don't know.
I'm just thinking out loud here.
No, I think there's something to that.
It's Nabokov's wife.
It's not the brendamatic look-up.
I think Nabokov would welcome the comparison, though.
Yeah.
If he got momentarily mistaken for Joyce.
Indeed.
I'm sorry.
So is Abe.
I don't know.
Was there a question there?
What's your schedule, by the way?
Well, I've got until 10.30, I think.
Okay.
Because I would like to, I've got plenty of stuff here.
Well, but I mean, that is to say, you and I can easily talk another 10 minutes.
I want you to sign my book.
Or even, yes, 10.30.
Maybe we can go outside and you can... I bought the wrong book?
Is that true?
Yeah.
I questioned that.
Oh, don't tell him.
How was that?
I haven't even looked at it yet.
These are review books, but you know, the color, I had it laid out, and I was in a rush this morning, and I grabbed my notebook, and I grabbed my... Don't sign this one.
No, I won't.
I grabbed the wrong book.
Oh, thanks.
That's light.
Why don't you give me your... Do you mind if I mail it to you?
Yeah.
Get a P.O.
box or something?
I'm sorry about that.
Give your address in that way.
Or I could wait till the next time we see each other.
Well, that may be forever.
That could be.
I mean, at the rate I go.
What a jerk.
I am.
Excuse me.
I'll send you a copy of my book.
How's that?
There's a present for you.
Watch your book.
You got my book, A Gentle Madness?
Yeah.
I love that book.
Do you like that book?
It's kind of fun.
You know my book.
I bought it.
The paperback's finally coming out next year.
When did the hardback come out?
95.
Yeah.
That's right, because I was just...
starting to write.
Yeah.
Oh, no, I adored it.
Well, thank you.
No, because it's the same compulsion.
This new book, I'm traveling, insanely traveling to the great libraries of the world through history.
And that's just for one, for, well, now it's more like two chapters because it's so good.
Next month, in three weeks, in Guinemar, they're both in Greece.
And then I spent five days with the monks, because this is a repository of Byzantine culture, and it has been there for a thousand years.
And then I'm going to Pergamum just to see the ruins of the ancient library that's still there.
And then I'm going to Ephesus, and then I'm going to St.
Catherine's on Mount Sinai, and then I'm going to go to the site of the new Alexandrian library and the old one.
Maybe a thousand words of text, if it's that much.
But you have to go, and you have to do it.
But it was a very expensive trip, so I pitched it to Smithsonian, and they're buying a story.
Oh, great.
They pay very, very well.
Do they?
Yeah, five grand, which is not bad.
Plus some expenses, plus exposure that is wonderful, plus it's a one-time use.
I intend to just lift this and move it over to the book.
So I'm really excited about that.
When do you go?
I leave on the 22nd of October and I go straight to Pergamum.
It's a very complicated trip.
I wanted to go to Israel.
I wanted to go to the Cuman Caves.
Dead Sea Scrolls.
Oh, is that where they're from?
Yeah, right, right, right.
And I just can't fix it.
You can't do four countries in three places and spend six.
Well, you can't, but I've really got to do the ATHOS part right.
That's going to take time.
I mean, I've got 14 plane flights.
And, you know, it's hard.
Yeah, it is.
And I did an October trip last year that was just as ambitious.
It was four countries.
By the time I've done it, it's going to be 14 countries, but just to get little pieces of the puzzle.
I mean, you're writing about, you have to go to Durham Cathedral.
It's the one cathedral library that survived the dissolution of the monasteries.
You've got to go there.
You want to go to Hereford, where they were chained books.
The chained books are still there.
You want to go to St.
Gall, where they designed, you know, where the scriptorium plans were made.
Monte Cassino with Benedictine Du Bois.
I don't know.
This may be very, too ambitious, but I'm doing it.
I don't think you look at the writing and you say, now the writing has to, as you say, equal the material.
It has to be up to the quality of the material.
The whole thing about book culture, libraries of the future, information, preservation, issues, you know, these are the
I'm doing booksellers.
I'm doing the Jewish booksellers who escaped Hitler.
That's an excellent story.
And while I was there, I did Max Israel and his brother Nico in the Netherlands.
Max is one of the great, he is the great bookseller specializing in medicine and science today, particularly medicine.
Why is that?
He escaped the Germans, but he hid in the forest for two and a half years.
And the books they kept bringing him were all books on science and letters.
Is that true?
It's true.
He got to Switzerland.
They had an older brother, they said he was the smartest one of them all, and the Nazis got him.
He's gone.
And their stories really haven't been written.
And they're up there.
Even since I started this,
I've had four people done.
I had the last interview with Alfred Cajan in New York.
He died three months after I did the interview.
I'm grateful that I got that.
I start with Otto Bettman.
Really?
Yeah, Otto Bettman.
Remember when the Bettman archive was sold?
Sure, sure.
If somebody had told me this guy was alive and well and living in Florida and that his mind was sharp as a crack.
How old was he?
I thought he was 93.
I called him and went down immediately to see him.
And of course, here he is, he has touched every decade of the 20th century.
He basically revolutionized communications.
He came up with this idea of art, imagery.
And then he goes into the next generation.
He sells it to Gates.
Gates is digitizing the whole thing.
But he still has this abiding faith.
And plus, he's an emigre.
He was a rare books librarian at the German State Library in Berlin.
He got fired, plus he started taking photographs with the Leica.
So he comes to Leica and says, that's a great story.
And he is a world of community and class.
And so my wife and I were visiting.
He's got a little organ in his apartment.
And I said, could you play something?
I had my favorite photo.
He's played this beautiful little minuet.
And then we went to lunch, and I said, why Bach?
And he said, I believe that Bach was sent, that God sent Bach here in a order of chaos.
And he said, Beethoven goes off, and he goes here, and he goes there.
He said, Bach, and this is how I end the prologue.
He always brings us back to where we started.
Great.
I love the whole idea of a circle.
Perfect for you.
And a continuum.
And here is this.
I don't know.
It's about it.
It's great.
Do you get frustrated when you're around?
Do you sometimes think that this is too hard, you know, I'm not going to get it?
Yeah, I'll, you know, I never, yeah, there were some days I did think it was too hard, and how would I get through it?
I remember when I was about a year into the
papers, and I still felt I hadn't really made a dent.
So I began to think, oh, I'll never get through it.
So there were those days.
And then there was the day, oh, day, yes, it turned out to be six months.
But when I had all my notes, all the papers I had Xeroxed from the Lindbergh archives, everything lined up, and I began sorting it all out.
And I thought,
I mean, literally tens of thousands of notes.
And this is back in California.
Piles in California.
And I literally laid everything in piles by chapter.
And I just looked at it, and that was the moment of hopelessness.
That was utter despair.
And I said, how will I ever spin this into a book?
I mean, that just seemed unbelievable.
I imagine the anxiety was probably for five minutes, and then you stood there.
Yeah, and then I said, okay, yes, that's exactly right.
Let's get to work.
Okay, but now I've had that moment.
Yeah, I had my little cry.
Get over yourself.
Now do your job.
That's wonderful.
And you don't have, do you have assistants?
No, I'm the whole thing.
I do everything.
I mean, I even have to grab my own tape.
You have to.
Because this, you see, I'll get home.
Good morning, Mr. Stoeck.
I hear it, all right?
Yeah, let me see.
Where's the first place?
Just listen, you're going to hear it right here.
Right here, OK.
Connie, come here.
Where you going?
It's going to pick up.
He doesn't know the number of the old.